# DataBlock
`DataBlock` is ours own implementation of [`Apache Arrow`](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs) and adapt some concepts from [Velox](https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox). This crate uses the implementation described in [`Type Exercise in Rust`](https://github.com/skyzh/type-exercise-in-rust) to support the subset of [`Arrow`](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs) format. What's more, `DataBlock` is designed to be used in the query engine of `curvature`, therefore:
- it only provides the functions that query engine need to use
- optimize the speed in the use case of the query engine

# Difference with the official implementation
- Array is `!Send`, if you want to send `Array` between threads, copy the inner data in the `Array`
- `Array` is mutable! Query engine could mutate the `Array` with `&mut self` without copy, thanks to the `PingPongPtr`
- The result of the computation on `Array` should be written to a predefined `Array`. Arrow's computation will generate a new `Array`, it is inefficient and put a lots of pressure on the memory allocator. 
- An `Array` can not be partial slice of another `Array`
- Arrow use portable SIMD to perform vectorization. However, it is static(in compiler time). You should compile the arrow with `-C target-features=+feature` to compile the problem for the cpu that supports this feature. Running the program on the CPU that does not support it will cause undefined behavior. If you do not compile with these features, the code will not use this SIMD instructions even if the CPU support it. Whats more, portable simd is only available in the nightly. We detect the features supported by the cpu at runtime and using the corresponding SIMD instructions. Whats more, we use intrinsic to write the SIMD manually, such that comparison that can not be auto-vectorized could use the SIMD to perform acceleration. You can use it in stable rust now.

## Build
```
cargo build
```

**Note**: `DataBlock` requires your CPU to support `sse2` instruction set if your CPU is X86/X86-64. You can check it with `lscpu` on the ubuntu.

You do not need to pass the `RUSTFLAGS="-C target-feature=+features"` when building this crate. Code will try to use the following instructions dynamically:
- On X86/X86-64
    - avx2
- On ARM
    - Neon

## TODO
- [ ] Support `List` of type.

# Tittle-tattle

## ~~Auto-vectorization is all you need 😊~~
As we all know, **Compiler is smarter than you**. Data-block do not use SIMD manually(currently), it will let the compiler generate the best instructions for you. The trick is building different functions based on different target features and call the correct function at runtime. You can find the concrete example in [std::arch](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/arch/index.html#examples). 

At the first attempt, I tried to use the SIMD manually. It is pretty annoying:

-  I use the conditional compilation to generate efficient code at compiler time. User should build the code with `RUSTFLAGS="-C target-feature=+avx2"` to generate code that can only run on CPUs that have `avx2` feature. It is not portable at all! Even if we used the portable_simd crate, we still need this flag to build efficient code, according to this [guard](https://rust-lang.github.io/packed_simd/perf-guide/target-feature/rustflags.html). The portable means you can build the same code to different targets at compiler time, still static... Even if I build the code with correct flag, I found the instructions generated by the compiler is still slower than the auto-vectorization version on many different machines 😠!!! BTW: performance on some machine decreases 😠

- I have to use the nightly of the rust. SIMD is an unstable feature. Nightly has some strange bugs....

After doing lots of experiments, I decide to use auto-vectorization. I am the prompt engineer of the compiler. I will view the ASM code generated by the compiler to make sure some key functions are vectorized. For example, I use [unsafe code](https://godbolt.org/z/17v7TcWve) to enable auto-vectorization, maybe it is a bug? I replace the `BitVec` with `Vec<bool>`, iterate the array, do some computation and write results to `BitVec` can not be vectorized automatically. It is at least 100 times slower thant the vectorized version, you can find the benchmark in `benches/selection`.

## ~~Comparison~~
Comparing one array with another array(scalar) is widely used in the query engine. We can store the results that matches the comparison in two forms: `Vec<usize>` and `Vec<bool>`. For `Vec<usize>`, we store the index of the array that match the comparison. For `Vec<bool>`, we store the result of each value in the boolean array. 

If the expression has multiple comparisons conjunct with `And`, latter comparison can use the index array to avoid unnecessary computation, pretty cool. However, computing the index array is pretty expensive, compiler can not perform auto-vectorization for this code! In my benchmark, it is at least 10 times slower than storing the result in `Vec<bool>`😭. You can find the benchmark in `benches/selection`. So, when executing the expression, which one is faster is totally depend on the `Selectivity` of the expression. 

Currently, we store the result in `Vec<bool>` and will implement storing the result in `Vec<usize>` in the future. Executor of the expression should choose the correct function at runtime!

## `Vec<bool>` VS `BitMap`
- If we use `Vec<bool>` to store the comparison result, compiler can use auto-vectorization to speedup the comparison between primitive types. However, store the comparison result to `BitMap` can not be auto-vectorized, we should implement the SIMD manually
- Comparison and logical operation on `BitMap` is faster than on `Vec<bool>`, it is widely used in expressions.

## Comparison with `BitMap`. Awesome!
Insight: `BitMap` could return the index of one/zero quickly! Instead of using the index array to index the selected rows, we could youse the `BitMap` to index the array 😊. This unifies the `BitMap` and index array. 

Computation could choose to use the `BitMap` as index array in when it thinks it is more applicable. For example, the `StringArray` will always choose to view the `BitMap` as index array because it can not leverage SIMD to perform acceleration. The `PrimitiveArray` will choose to view the `BitMap` as index array when almost all of the bits are zeros. Using SIMD and cache locality is much faster even if it does lots of unnecessary computations